[Music]
Good day, I'm Norman Wildberger. Today we're going
to look at graphing polynomials. This is a way
of associating a visual geometrical object with
what's up till now been a purely algebraic object.
Once we do that, we can interpret the tangents
that we defined last time—the various key tangents
of a polynomial: first tangent, second tangent,
third tangent, and so on. We can interpret those
geometrically as tangent lines, tangent conics,
which are approximating the polynomial at a point.
Now, I'm going to increasingly be using the
"polynomial" word rather than the "poly number"
word to make contact with more classical
mathematics, but I hope you keep in mind
that for us, a polynomial is just another word
for a poly number. So, when it comes down to it,
a polynomial like this is essentially just a
list of numbers—the list of the coefficients
of the various powers of alpha. And today,
we're going to be talking about just those
polynomials with integer coefficients, so-called
integral polynomials or integral poly numbers.
So our idea of representing such a polynomial
graphically is to plot the values of
pairs of numbers and the polynomial values at
those numbers. That way, we get a two-dimensional
representation that somehow incorporates
or allows us to visualize the polynomial.
Let's start off by having a look at this
particular polynomial and calculating some
of these values of the polynomial at various
constants. Here, on the left-hand side,
I've listed various integers from -5 up to
10, and I've computed for you the values of
this polynomial at the various constants. So, this
-166 here means that if you replace alpha with -3,
then this evaluates to -166. So, our idea
is to graph pairs of such numbers in a
two-dimensional setting, and for that, we're
going to go back to Cartesian coordinates.
This is a way of introducing geometry
in a very concrete and explicit way,
using essentially a sheet of graph paper with
equally spaced horizontal and vertical lines
forming this pattern of unit cells or squares. We
can write a distinguished horizontal line and call
it the x-axis (the usual convention), and we can
distinguish a particular vertical line and call
it the y-axis. We can label these various nodes
here: 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, and so on in that direction,
-1, -2, -3, and so on in this direction, and going
up: 1, 2, 3, 4; going down: -1, -2, -3, and so on.
The idea is that if we have a point like this
one here, then we can look at the x-coordinate,
which is 1, and we can look at the y-coordinate,
which is 6, and then we can essentially give this
point a name by associating it with the pair (1,
6) enclosed in square brackets by convention. So,
we can define a mathematical object called
an integer point, which is just a pair of
integers enclosed in square brackets, and it's an
ordered pair. So, there's a first one and a second
one corresponding to the x-coordinate and the
y-coordinate. That defines a new type of object,
which we might call "Int²," an integer point.
And then a variant on that is when we do exactly
the same thing but we allow the numbers in the
brackets to be rational numbers. In that case,
we get a rational point, and this new
type of object we can call "Rat²" or,
for simplicity, just a point. So, a point is
generally just a pair of rational numbers.
So, there's (0, 6); there's a point (0, 3);
there's (-1, 0); there's (-2, -3). We can also
talk about points that are not necessarily
on the intersections, but sort of with more
random positions. One of the lovely things about
this Cartesian coordinate system, essentially
introduced around the time of Descartes, is
that we can encode lines and other nice curves,
like conics, pleasantly in an algebraic form. So,
for example, this line here, which goes through
these various points—equally spaced: 1 over 3 up,
1 over 3 up, 1 over 3 up—so this really is a line.
This line can be described by the relation between
the x- and y-coordinates of the points on it.
A usual kind of description is in terms of an
equation that we can write like this: in this
case, 3x - y + 3 = 0. Every point on this
line happens to satisfy this equation. So,
for example, (1, 6)—if you replace x with
1 and y with 6, then you get 3 - 6 + 3,
which is indeed zero. So, this point satisfies
the equation, telling us this point is on the
line. You could check that all these points lie on
the line in the sense of satisfying the equation.
Now, the x and the y are in some sense arbitrary;
they're not really necessary. The central
ingredients are the various coefficients that
appear here, and we like to abbreviate them by
just talking about their proportion: 3 to -1 to 3.
That encodes the line just as well as that does,
and the pointy brackets sort of alert us to
the fact that we're talking about an Euclidean
line. So, we can talk about lines, and we can talk
about points in this Cartesian coordinate system.
Now, maybe it's useful to say here that the
algebraic side of things—when we're talking about
points like this or points like this and lines
like this—doesn't actually require a picture.
The picture is a physical object that is, strictly
speaking, outside the world of mathematics. It
resides here in the physical world in which we
live. We're making various assumptions when we
work with a picture like this, and we're also
disregarding certain subtleties. For example,
we're not fussing about exactly how wide
these lines are, we're not fussing too much
about exactly how big the points are that we're
drawing, and we're also kind of assuming that
it is possible, in fact, to create a pattern
like this where these lines actually are all
equally spaced and, by implication, where
they're all parallel. So, even if we were
to extend these lines indefinitely, they would
not meet—it's our idea of parallelism. The same
for the vertical lines. But that's really an
assumption about the world in which we live,
which may or may not be completely
true. It's a kind of an important point.
So, let me just say a little bit more about
that. Imagine for a second that we're living
on a round planet. Well, okay, we are,
but imagine that this round planet was
completely smooth and didn't have any objects
on it other than perhaps ourselves. Otherwise,
it was a completely smooth, featureless Earth,
for example, perhaps something like this. So,
imagine this is a model of the Earth, and perhaps
you and I are right there—we're very, very tiny—so
that as we look at the Earth, it's locally quite
flat and we see what looks to us like a plane.
Now, suppose that we attempted on this
surface to draw such a grid plane. That
would be a natural thing to do. We might make
some strings and try to make some parallel
lines, okay? And then some ones which are
perpendicular, parallel lines like this. But if we
started examining the geometry of this grid plane
that we're making on the surface of the sphere,
we would discover that it differs from this
one subtly in measurable ways. In other words,
the lines that we are, for example, thinking
are parallel—if we actually stand to them,
we would find very likely that they meet.
Or, we would find that these two lines are
perpendicular to this one, but if we move
this line up and say to that one there,
then these two lines are no longer perpendicular
to it, which is quite different from our
assumptions about this thing in the Euclidean
plane. So, in other words, there are assumptions
about the physical world built into a model of
this graph paper that we have in our booklets.
It's not entirely obvious that a piece of
graph paper exists. Well, yes, of course,
it looks like it exists in your notebook, but if
you made a very, very careful measurement of the
various relationships between these lines and the
various perpendicularities, you might find that
the curvature of the universe somehow makes them
not as perfectly aligned as we think they are.
There's a bit of a can of worms that we have
to recognize that we don't really know the
true geometry of the world in which
we live, and since the 20th century,
Einstein has taught us that the geometry
of the world in which we live is, in fact,
much more complicated than we used to think it
is. There is such a thing as curvature, and the
true overall structure is far from settled, but
in particular, it's probably pretty obvious that
it's not completely Euclidean and straightforward
the way people used to think 100 or 200 years ago.
So we have to separate in our minds the
mathematical model that we're working with,
the theory that we're developing,
and these pictures that we're drawing
to help us visualize the mathematics.
This is an important point—that for us,
the expressions that we will write down will
be primary, logically. They take precedence.
These pictures are just for us
aids in understanding things,
and we must be careful not to too quickly draw
mathematical conclusions from the pictures that we
draw. It's something to be aware of—a potential
difficulty with relying too much on pictures.
So this is the point I've just made: that the
physical existence of a sheet of graph paper is
separate from the mathematical model of integer
points or rational points that we can work with
algebraically. And there are empirical questions
or technological issues associated with the graph
paper and constructions on it. For example, is a
sheet of graph paper really Euclidean? That's the
issue we've already talked about. Do we live in
a curved world? How does that affect the actual
properties of a piece of graph paper? Another
question is, can we extend such a sheet of graph
paper? In many of our constructions, we might be
interested in extending the axes, perhaps quite
a long way to deal with very big numbers or very
small negative numbers. So, a natural question is,
to what extent can we extend this graph paper?
Obviously, there are physical barriers because
we're living on a planet Earth of only a
certain size, and of course, in practice,
it's hard to get a piece of paper that's too
big. But even theoretically, the large-scale
structure of the universe may actually be kind of
closed. There may not be room, even theoretically,
in the universe to have a sheet of graph
paper that, for example, extends indefinitely.
Another sort of related or inverse question
to that one is, can we subdivide a sheet of
graph paper arbitrarily? Suppose we
want to create a finer mesh by, say,
subdividing each of our squares into ten little
pieces, and then we want a yet finer one where
we subdivide even those smaller squares into ten
little pieces, and so on. Can we keep doing that?
Well, theoretically we can, but in practice,
empirically, in the world in which we live,
once we get down to very small scales, the
laws of physics start becoming quite strange,
and we arrive at limitations of our ability to
resolve quantities, and quantum effects start
interfering with our measurement. So, in the real
world, you can't keep subdividing things. Or,
to put it another way, when you subdivide things,
things change. The laws of physics start changing
on you, and you enter a world that is quite
different from the way it is in our experience.
So there actually are quite deep questions
of a physical nature—the physical nature
of the continuum or the large-scale
structure of the universe—connected
with a sheet of graph paper and what we
actually can do with it practically. So,
one way of dealing with these issues is to say,
all right, we're going to think of these graphs
that we're going to draw and the pictures that
we make as simply aids to our understanding,
and that we're going to draw a line between
the logic of what we're doing algebraically
and the pictures that we're going to draw to
help us understand things and maybe guide our
intuition. Because we are actually very
visual creatures, we have a lot of brain
processing devoted to visuals, so it makes
sense to use that; it's one of our strengths.
So let's go back to our polynomial, this one
here, and let's try to graph it. Here are these
various values that we've already computed.
So, here are now the pairs of numbers that we
would like to graph—these are sort of integer
points, and there's a range of them. And one
thing that we see is that the y-coordinates,
the second coordinates, are actually, well,
they get quite big, especially big negative.
So, if we're going to hope to picture them,
we should scale our grid in a rather different
way than what we did before. And we have to
allow ourselves this flexibility to
scale the two axes in different ways.
So here, the x-axis has been scaled so this is one
unit: 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, and so on. However, the
y-axis has been scaled dramatically different—this
now represents 100. So: 100, 200, 300, 400, 500,
that's 1,000, that's -500, that's -1,000. Now,
I haven't drawn all the lines because to do so
would require thousands of lines. So we're going
to adopt the convention that we're going to forget
about all the lines—horizontal and vertical—except
for the two axes themselves, and we're just going
to use parallel lines to locate the positions of
points. So let's graph these points: -5, -192;
so -5, and then -192 is about there; and then this
point: -4, -484, about there; -3, -166; -2, -30;
-1, 8; 0, 8 actually has the same y-value;
1, 6 going down just a little bit; 2, 24 up
a little bit; 3, 320 up a little bit more;
then down 4, -25; 5, -42; 6, -454; and 7,
-116. So these various points that we've drawn now
are, in some sense, a picture of this polynomial.
Now, you might not be used to that
kind of picture—you might be used to
a more continuous picture—but if
we're working over the integers,
which we can suppose we're at least initially
doing, then this is a very reasonable picture,
because in our minds there are only integers,
and we're just plotting various integer points.
Of course, we're not plotting a lot of integer
points—we're not plotting any of those points
with an x-coordinate more than 6 or a y-coordinate
less than 6. So in fact, this is just some very
small fraction of a much bigger picture that we
could extend far in either direction if we had
the patience and the room to do so. And maybe
also the computing power, because perhaps it
would get quite involved to compute these things
if the x's become very big or very big negative.
So this is a graph; it's not the only graph
that we can draw. It's a kind of a partial
graph—it only encodes part of the picture—but
nevertheless, it's some kind of physical
representation that we can look at and say, ah,
there's some kind of pattern here. It's almost
just like some dynamical thing moving. We
might say it's an integral graph because
all the points that we're plotting have
integer coordinates. But a lot of times we
are interested in not just integral values
but also rational values—in other words,
points with rational coordinates.
So let's say a few words about them.
Suppose, for example, that we're
interested in the standard grid
plane here, where now the x-axis is here, the
y-axis is here, and suppose we're interested in,
say, plotting a point like this with
rational coordinates: 9/2 and 5/3. 9/2,
5/3—well, one way to do that is to say
9/2 is exactly halfway between 4 and 5,
so we'll draw some point halfway between 4 and
5, and 5/3 is, well, somewhere between 1 and 2,
and we'll do it roughly. But we would like
to do it exactly because we would like to
be completely correct here. So how do we
construct such a point? It's important to
realize that we can construct such a point with
just lines connecting existing points in our grid
plane. So I'm going to show you how to do it for
this point, and I hope you'll see the pattern.
To get 9/2, first of all, on the x-axis here,
what I'm going to do is I'm going to consider
a rectangle—this one right here—which is 9 over
and 2 up. So that point there is the point with
coordinates 9/2, and I'm going to connect that
point to the origin with this green line. Now,
where that green line crosses the line
x = 1, because this is exactly halfway,
this will be exactly halfway there. So this will
be the coordinate 4.5, or 9/2. In a similar way,
if we want to get 5/3 in this direction, what
I do is I make a rectangle that goes 5 this way
and 3 this way. So this rectangle right here—this
is the point with y-coordinate 5 and x-coordinate
3. I draw the line connecting the origin, and I
see where that line meets the line x = 1. Now,
in that point there—so what is its y-coordinate?
Well, this is 1/3 of the way from here to here,
that's 1/3 of the way, and so this will be 1/3 of
the way to here. So that point there will be 5/3.
And all we needed to do that was to connect points
that are already in the grid plane to create
that line and to create that line and see where
those two lines cross—lines that are part of the
grid plane. So once, of course, we have the
x-coordinate here and the y-coordinate here,
it's not too hard to make parallel lines
which then give us the required point.
So with this technique in hand, we can now
extend our view of a polynomial. We can now say,
all right, let's try to visualize a polynomial
p by plotting many points of the form (c, p(c)),
where c now are suitably chosen rational numbers
in a certain chosen range. In other words,
we don't have to stick with integer
values of c—we can substitute more
general rational values and plot those points.
So now let's have another look at our
favorite polynomial, this one right here.
The existing points that we have already drawn,
the ones with integer values in this range,
are right there. Now I'm going to add some new
points—the green ones—whose x-coordinates are 1/2,
-1/2, 3/2, -3/2, in other words, sort of
halfway between the various points that
we already have. So if I plug in 1/2 into here
and compute, I get 95/16. And when I plot that,
there's the x-coordinate 1/2, 95/16—that's roughly
about six, and so with those two coordinates,
we can plot that point there. There it is there,
right in that green. And I've also plotted -1/2,
159/16, 3/2, and 143/16, -3/2 and -49/16, 5/2,
which is there, and -5/2, 303/16, -7/2—that's 3.5,
that's this one over here with 191/16, and 9/2
and -961/16—that's just barely in our range.
So we have these new green points now to augment
the red ones that we already have. And now,
because I'm interested in the rational
graph, what I'm going to do is I'm going
to do a time-honored technique that goes back
to primary school, or probably even earlier:
we are going to join the dots. We're going to
take our ruler or our straight edge and just
join these adjacent points, because they're
all one after the other in a certain order,
join them up with this black line—just
straight line segments from one to the
next—and then we get some kind of
picture of a part of the polynomial.
Of course, this is not a complete picture; it's
not complete for two different opposing reasons.
It's important to appreciate both of these ways
in which this is not complete. It's not complete,
first of all, because we only went from here
to here. All the values to the right here,
all the values to the left here were not included
in the picture. We could have included some more
of them by making the paper larger or perhaps
by scaling our axes appropriately. But no matter
how we do that, no matter how big a piece of
paper we have, no matter how much we scale,
we still only get always a finite part of
a bigger picture. It's always possible to
extend the picture, so we never
get the whole picture this way.
There's another way in which we don't get the
whole picture: because we've only subdivided
each one of these intervals into, in this case,
two pieces. Now, I could come along and say,
well, I'm going to do a better job; I'm going
to subdivide each one of these intervals into,
say, ten pieces. So I could calculate
ten different values and plot them all;
then I would get a much finer resolution.
But still, it would only be a partial
picture. There's still a resolution here,
and between the points that I'm plotting,
I'm not really getting the accurate values—I'm
replacing the values with straight line segments.
Actually, if you have a computer program that
plots curves like this, it might even dispense
entirely with drawing little line segments.
If the number of points is sufficiently large,
if I divided each one of these pieces
into, say, 100 and plotted all the points,
then those points would probably run together,
forming what looks to you like a continuous curve.
There'd be no need to make little adjoining
lines. So, in fact, mathematics programs that
do make calculations do almost exactly this:
they use a "join the dots" method, or they just
deal with dots themselves, sort of a pixel
approach or like a vector graphics approach.
But the important thing to realize is that even
if the picture that your computer is outputting
looks very smooth, it's an illusion. It
is not the real picture; it is a picture
that has been derived by going to a certain
resolution and no further—just the way it is.
It's just as impossible to plot all the points in
one of these little intervals as it is impossible
to plot all the points on the whole line, whatever
those terms even mean. We can go a certain way in
both directions, and that's just the natural
limitations of this mathematical problem.
So this picture here that I'm drawing is actually
very representative of what actually happens in
practice, and there's no need to be ashamed
of drawing straight line segments. That way,
we stick with something that's completely
concrete. I could have tried to sort of
artistically draw a curve through there, but that
would be a bit sloppy because I would probably
not do a very good job, and also, if I did it
again the next day, the curve that I drew would
be probably noticeably different from the curve
I drew today. So it's not really reproducible,
and it's also very difficult to specify to you
what exactly I have done—sorry if I'm taking a
picture—but here, you can specify this and pass
the instructions over the internet to someone
else, and they can create more or less the same
diagram, subject to the actual widths of points
and widths of lines that you're going to use.
So this is the essence of plotting polynomials.
Now, let's turn our hand to some interesting
applications involving tangents. At the end
of the last lecture, I gave you an exercise
to do, which I strongly encouraged you to do,
which was to calculate various
tangents to this cubic polynomial:
5 - 3 alpha - 4 alpha^2 + alpha^3. So let's
have a look at some of those tangents,
and you can compare with what I've got to see
if I've gotten the right answer. And I'm also
going to graph not just the original
cubic but also various tangents.
The original cubic p is plotted here,
so this sort of signifies the coding:
the red points and the black lines.
I'm just using integer points here,
so you can think of this, if you like, as
being essentially over the integers—integral
points—and I'm joining the dots between these
integral points. And beyond these ranges,
the numbers go off my scale, which goes
roughly from 20 to -20, or maybe to around -30.
Okay, let's consider the various tangents to this
at the point zero. Those are the simplest to read
off because they just correspond to truncating
this expression in various ways. The simplest
truncation is when we ignore all of those things,
and we just get the zeroth tangent at zero,
which is just five. Well, that's also a poly
number or polynomial, and we can plot it also.
It's very simple to plot—it just turns out to be
this line. Why? Because we're plotting all the
points of the form c and this thing evaluated at
c, but this thing evaluated at c is always five,
so we're plotting (1, 5), (2, 5), (3, 5), (4, 5),
and so on—all of the points just along this line
where the y-coordinate is five. So there's the
zeroth tangent to this cubic at the point zero.
The first tangent is what we get when we
disregard everything except the constant
and the linear terms—that's 5 - 3
alpha. That's a linear polynomial,
and what does that look like? Well, it looks
like this line right here with the blue dots and
the red line. It is a line; it's the line y = 5 -
3x, if you like to think in terms of x and y. So,
for example, when x is zero, then we get
the value five; when x is one or alpha is 1,
we get the value two; when alpha is
two, we get the value -1, and so on.
The second tangent to the polynomial at zero is
what we get when we just drop that cubic term,
so it's 5 - 3 alpha - 4 alpha^2, and we can
plot that also for different values: -1, 0,
-2, and so on. We can plug it into here
and get the corresponding y-coordinate,
and I've graphed them for you. So there's
this point here, this one, this one, this one,
this one, and this one—those are the values
that are graphed in the range that I've drawn.
So, to summarize, the original cubic is
pictured by these points; the zeroth tangent is
plotted by these points or that sort of horizontal
line; the first tangent, or the tangent line,
is plotted by these points; and the second
tangent line, or the tangent conic at zero,
is represented or graphed by those points. So
you can see that this is a purely integral graph.
This is a picture that you could draw
even if you did not know what fractions
were—if you only knew arithmetic with
integers, you could draw this picture,
and you can see some shape, and some patterns,
even though we're only working over the integers.
Now let's have a look at the same curve, but from
the point of view of a different point—not zero,
but we'll choose another point. Let's say the
point two and see what the various tangents to
the same curve look like at the point two—in
other words, sort of at this point here.
So the tangents at two I asked you to compute last
time, and it turns out that the zeroth tangent at
two is the constant -9, the first tangent at two
is 5 - 7 alpha, and the second tangent at two is
133 - 15 alpha + 2 alpha^2, and I've plotted
those for you: -9—that's the horizontal line
consisting of these green points; the tangent line
5 - 7 alpha is that line there consisting of these
points, and the tangent conic is, well, it has
quite a different shape. In this case, it kind
of a parabolic thing opening upwards, now still
touching there. Also goes through these points.
So those are the zero, first, and second
tangents to the cubic at the point two.
So, this is obviously so much fun you're going
to want to do this yourselves. You've already
calculated, I hope, the tangents to p at 1
and -1, as well as the ones that we've done
today. So please construct integer graphs
for the tangents to p at 1 and -1. So make
exact corresponding pictures for the tangents
at 1 and also at -1. It's very satisfying,
and it's calculus! If you want to have
something that is a little bit more smooth,
you can do a little bit more work, and you can
fill in some points by adding some more rational
points, maybe at halves. If you want to be more
ambitious, you can divide each one up into four,
plot them all, get some nice pictures—everything
can be done by hand, you don't need any artistic
ability. Just remember we're only using line
segments to join the dots. So this is pretty cool,
and there's more cool stuff. In fact, we're
going to see this cubic again—there's something
really remarkable about this cubic, well, in
fact, about cubics in general. But to prepare
the way for that, I think next time we'll
talk about lines and parabolas. The first
tangents—tangent lines—are lines, they're
pretty easy to understand. Tangent conics
are always these parabolas, and we're going
to have to know a little bit about parabolas.
We'll study them algebraically and draw some
pictures, so I hope you'll join me for that.
I'm Norman Wildberger. Thanks for listening.